Monthly report November 2023 (#1189)
input-output-hk/hydra: docs/monthly/2023-11-monthly.md

---
title: November 2023
slug: 2023-11
authors: [ch1bo, abailly]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since October 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

This month, several items were restructured on the project
[roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21/views/7):

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2023-11-roadmap.jpg) <small><center>The latest roadmap with features and ideas</center></small>

#### Notable updates

> - Release of version `0.14.0` imminent as most of the [stateless chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Release of version `0.14.0` is imminent as most of the [stateless chain
```

Reviewer 2: @ch1bo @abailly-iohk 
Please consider updating this paragraph thus:
'The release of version `0.14.0` is imminent, as the [stateless chain observation #1096](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1096) feature is mostly complete, with only some internal refactoring remaining.'

  observation #1096](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1096)
  feature is done and only some internal refactoring missing.

> - Refined user submitted feature idea on supporting extended keys

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to update the paragraph thus:
'The user-submitted feature idea on supporting extended keys, [#1141](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1141), has been refined. The purpose of this item is now clear, and although it's not currently a priority, work on it can be started.'

  [#1141](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1141). The purpose
  (why?) of this item is clear now and work can be started (it's not a priority
  still though).

> - Two new items were created to improve developer experience of the [hydra build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Two new items were created to improve the developer experience of the [Hydra build
```

>   toolchain #1146](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1146) and a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  toolchain #1146](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1146). Additionally, a
```

>   follow-up on things learned by `hydra-poll` to create a full end-to-end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  a follow-up on things  learned by `hydra-poll` aims to create a full end-to-end
```

>   example of a [2-player game in a hydra head

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  example of a [two-player game in a Hydra head
```

  #1098](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1098).

> - There was already an item about reacting to mainchain parameter changes on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There was already an item about reacting to main chain parameter changes on the
```

  roadmap, which included not only protocol parameter updates, but also

>   hard-fork events. With the upcoming hard-fork into `Conway`, we split off the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  hard-fork events. With the upcoming hard fork into `Conway`, the team split off the
```

>   hard-fork events. With the upcoming hard-fork into `Conway`, we split off the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  hard fork events. With the upcoming hard fork into `Conway`, we split off the
```

>   changes needed to navigate such hard-fork and concretized it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  changes needed to navigate the hard fork and clarified them:
```

>   + [Conway support #1177](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1177) will make the `hydra-node` support Conway and allow users to keep heads open across the hard-fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + [Conway support #1177](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1177) will make the `hydra-node` support Conway and allow users to keep heads open across the hard fork.
```

>   + [Drop Babbage support #1178](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1178) will eventually make us drop support for the Babbage era and retain maintainability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + [Drop Babbage support #1178](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1178) will eventually drop support for the Babbage era and retain maintainability.
```

  + The original item is only about [reacting to protocol parameter changes #195](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/195) now.

> - Substantial updates on the design of the next major feature [Incremental decommit #1057](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1057) and work can be started on this item.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Substantial updates were made to the design of the next major feature [Incremental decommit #1057](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1057), and work on it can be started.
```

> - In general we prepared prepared multiple of these 💭 idea items and many of them will turn into 💬 features soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In general, the team prepared several of these 💭 idea items and many of them will turn into 💬 features soon.
```

## Hydra development

[Issues and pull requests closed since the last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-10-31..2023-11-30)

This month, the team worked on the following:

### MeshJS + Hydra

> At the beginning of month we attended the Cardano Summit in Dubai where we held

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the beginning of month, the team attended the Cardano Summit in Dubai where they held
```

> the _Hydra MasterClass_ workshop. There we also presented the Hydra-Poll dApp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the _Hydra MasterClass_ workshop. There they also presented the Hydra-Poll dApp
```

Reviewer 2: @abailly-iohk please also change 'dApp' to 'DApp'

which is using MeshJS to build Hydra transactions on the frontend.

> We collaborated with the MeshJS team closely and as the outcome of this work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hydra team collaborated closely with the MeshJS team and as the outcome of this work
```

> they added some Hydra specific features to the MeshJS SDK. There is a nice low

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MeshJS team added some Hydra specific features to the MeshJS SDK. There is a nice low
```

level [API](https://meshjs.dev/apis/transaction/builderExample) for building
custom transactions which is pretty similar to what `cardano-cli` does.

Now you can use `isHydra` field which you can pass to this API which then uses
another set of protocol paramters suitable for Hydra (eg. usually in Hydra we

> want to have zeroed transaction fees, reduce script execution units etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
want to have zero transaction fees, reduce script execution units etc.).
```

> Big thanks to the MeshJS team on giving us much needed support! They were

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Big thanks to the MeshJS team on giving much needed support. They were
```

> presenting these changes in our monthy review meeting so make sure to watch the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
presenting these changes in the monthly review meeting so make sure to watch the
```

[recording](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-iv8IveUzA2KrJV_Kqrgx4ts05Ow0zjM).

### Rendering the Hydra specification

> Besides working on the design of incremental commits itself, we also wanted to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides working on the design of incremental commits itself, the team also 
```

> tidy up the way the [Hydra protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tidied up the way the [Hydra protocol
```

specification](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/core-concepts/specification)

> is written itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is written.
```

So far, the specification was written in LaTex and rendered to a PDF. LaTeX was
a good choice because of its expressiveness on math expressions, but not so

> great of a choice for pull requesting changes and the entry barrier is quite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
great a choice for pull requests and the entry barrier is quite
```

high. The majority of documentation around Hydra and Mithril is written using
Markdown and rendered into a webpage using a static site generator, currently

> [Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io/). Most modern markdown renderers do support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io/). Most modern Markdown renderers do support
```

> LaTeX-style math nowadays, even the normal [Github file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LaTeX-style math nowadays, even the normal [GitHub file
```

preview](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting/writing-mathematical-expressions).

> Hence, we experimented with using the more standard Markdown format to write the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, the team experimented with using the more standard Markdown format to write the
```

specification, but still being able to use LaTeX math **and** LaTeX macros

> (which are _still_ heavily used in the spec). From this we want to have both, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(which are _still_ heavily used in the spec). The aim is to have both, a
```

PDF and HTML rendering.

![](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmPUTYaSViLEyZcGmsTPL4jHdGSevH3yc3RD7TRhU3ivwH?filename=Peek%202023-11-28%2018-42.gif)

> While not yet finished, the GIF above shows already progress being made using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While not yet finished, the GIF above shows the progress being made using
```

[pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) to resolve macros, producing a PDF via `xelatex`

> and Docusaurus compatible markdown. Using powerful extensions of pandoc we can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and Docusaurus compatible markdown. Using powerful extensions of pandoc one can
```

Reviewer 2: Please also update 'markdown' to 'Markdown'

even convert TikZ, GraphViz and Mermaid into both target formats.

## Community update

Beside the great work done by the MeshJS team towards supporting Hydra in the browser, here are some news and updates on community-led work streams related to Hydra:

> * SundaeLabs has made good progress on their [off-line mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* SundaeLabs has made good progress on their [offline mode
```

  PR](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1118) which should
  hit the main branch soon,

> * TxPipe has been collaborating with IOG's Creative Engineering team

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TxPipe has been collaborating with IOG's creative engineering team
```

  to build _Cardaminal_, a command-line wallet, and demonstrated it

>   during our monthly review meeting. Cardaminal is built in Rust,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  during the monthly review meeting. Cardaminal is built in Rust,
```

  leveraging [Pallas](https://github.com/txpipe/pallas) libraries, and

>   is aimed at being a fully-fledged scriptable wallet affording users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is aimed at being a fully-fledged scriptable wallet providing users
```

  with powerful stateful transaction edition capabilities, native
  assets management, chain synchronisation, etc.

>   We are already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>   thinking of making Cardaminal compatible with Hydra - to be able to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The plan is to make Cardaminal compatible with Hydra - to be able to
```

>   use it to interact with a Head - and Mithril - using snapshots to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  use it to interact with a head - and Mithril - using snapshots to
```

  synchronise the wallet.

> * The team behind [zkSNARK in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The team behind [ZK Snarks in
```

  Hydra](https://projectcatalyst.io/funds/10/f10-development-and-infrastructure/a-zero-knowledge-proof-framework-for-cardano-based-on-hydra-and-zk-snarks)
  Catalyst proposal is making good progress and should be able to give

>   a demo on our next monthly review meeting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a demo at the next monthly review meeting
```

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for November 2023 was held on 2023-11-27 via Google
Meet with these [slides][slides] and the [recording][recording].

> We are thankful to have had again so many great demos from the numerous projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hydra team is thankful to have again had so many great demos from the numerous projects
```

> in and around Hydra and Mithril projects - we should really schedule it to be 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in and around Hydra and Mithril projects - we should really schedule it to be one
```

hour planned duration. Also, if you have not watched it already, make sure to
check out the recording, the written report is merely expanding on a couple of
topics but cannot render the cool demonstrations.

At first look, the demonstrated projects may appear not related - we even had a
minimal command-line wallet on the show after all. But as we went on, these
impulses spark discussions and it becomes clear that all of these projects are
connected.

> For example, the terminal based wallet "Cardaminal" as it was presented the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the terminal-based wallet 'Cardaminal' as it was presented the
```

> first time in public this month, could itself become a mithril client for faster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
first time in public this month, could itself become a Mithril client for faster
```

> synchronizing or even light-mode using the recently published rust client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
synchronizing or even light-mode using the recently published Rust client
```

> library for mithril. Furthermore, such a minimal wallet would be a great testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
library for Mithril. Furthermore, such a minimal wallet would be a great testing
```

> ground for a hydra-aware wallet. The MeshJS integration also has further

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ground for a Hydra-aware wallet. The MeshJS integration also has further
```

potential of Hydra specific `fetcher` and `submitter` providers.

On the other hand, we also stumbled over not-so-optimistic sentiment even in

> much more mature scaling solutions like the Bitcoin Ligthning Network. [This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
much more mature scaling solutions like the Bitcoin Lightning Network. [This
```

tweet](https://twitter.com/udiWertheimer/status/1719122153155473492) summarizes

> that creating non-custodial [scalability/LN] solutions "feel like the most

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that creating non-custodial [scalability/LN] solutions 'feel like the most
```

> thankless thing in the world".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
thankless thing in the world'.
```

It is an exciting ride still, but events like this monthly review meeting with

> its colorful demonstrations of small steps we can take to improve the usability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its colorful demonstrations of small steps to improve the usability
```

and scalability of Cardano piece by piece with often unknown synergies is also

> empowering. This month again made us feel not "only a tribe", but more a working

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
empowering. This month again made us feel not 'only a tribe', but more a working
```
